>> Stewart: ON THIS EDITION FOR
SATURDAY, JANUARY 23: HIT HARD--
STATES OF EMERGENCY ARE DECLARED
AS A GIANT BLIZZARD DUMPS UP TO
TWO FEET OF SNOW ALONG THE EAST
COAST; AND IN OUR SIGNATURE
SEGMENT, RETRAINING POLICE ON
THEIR USE OF LETHAL FORCE.
>> IS HE THREATENING ANYBODY
RIGHT NOW?
IS HE KILLING ANYBODY RIGHT NOW?
SO, DO WE HAVE TO JUMP RIGHT IN
AND TAKE CARE OF IT OURSELVES?
NO.
>> Stewart: NEXT, ON PBS
NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS AT
LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
ALISON STEWART.
>> Stewart: GOOD EVENING, AND
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
A GIANT WINTER SNOW STORM HAS
BEEN BEARING DOWN ON THE EAST
COAST ALL DAY.
THE BLIZZARD, JONAS, AFFECTS AS
MANY AS 80 MILLION PEOPLE IN 15
STATES, FROM THE SOUTHEAST TO
NEW ENGLAND, WITH SOME AREAS
ALREADY SEEING MORE THAN TWO
FEET OF SNOW.
THE MESSAGE FROM GOVERNORS AND
BIG CITY MAYORS: STAY INDOORS
AND KEEP OFF THE ROADS.
THE NEWSHOUR'S IVETTE FELICIANO
HAS MORE.
>> Reporter: THE NATION'S
CAPITAL IS ONE OF THE WORST HIT
AREAS.
MORE THAN 30 INCHES OF SNOW HAS
FALLEN IN AND AROUND WASHINGTON,
D.C.
THE WHITE HOUSE LOOKED TRUE TO
ITS NAME.
>> IT SEEMS LIKE THE WIND'S
PICKED UP A LITTLE BIT MORE, SO
IT'S JUST CRAZY.
>> Reporter: WASHINGTON'S MAYOR
PLEADED WITH MOTORISTS AND
PEDESTRIANS TO STAY OFF THE
ROADS.
>> IT'S VERY DANGEROUS FOR OUR
VEHICLE OPERATORS AND VERY
DANGEROUS FOR YOU.
THE VISIBILITY IS POOR AND YOU
CANNOT BE SEEN.
>> Reporter: THE SNOW IN PARTS
OF PENNSYLVANIA AND VIRGINIA WAS
2.5 FEET DEEP BY THIS AFTERNOON.
FROM VIRGINIA TO NEW YORK, THE
NATIONAL WEATHER SERVICE
MEASURED WIND GUSTS FROM 30 TO
50 MILES AN HOUR, AND AS HIGH AS
75 MILES AN HOUR IN DELAWARE.
POWER OUTAGES LEFT THOUSANDS OF
HOMES WITHOUT ELECTRICITY--
150,000 NORTH AND SOUTH CAROLINA
RESIDENTS AND 90,000 IN NEW
JERSEY.
SOME NEW JERSEY COASTAL TOWNS
WERE DELUGED BY SEVERE FLOODING.
AT EAST COAST AIRPORTS, MORE
THAN 4,300 FLIGHTS WERE
CANCELLED TODAY, AND ALREADY
1,200 FLIGHTS ARE CANCELED FOR
TOMORROW.
IN NEW YORK CITY AND LONG
ISLAND, DRIVING ON PUBLIC
STREETS WAS BANNED EXCEPT FOR
EMERGENCIES, WHILE BUS SERVICE
WAS SUSPENDED AND TRAINS WERE
LIMITED.
ALL BROADWAY MUSICALS AND PLAYS
CANCELLED THEIR PERFORMANCES,
BUT THE BROADWAY LEAGUE PROMISED
THE SHOWS WOULD GO ON SUNDAY.
>> THIS STORM WILL SURPASS 20
INCHES ACCUMULATION IN NEW YORK
CITY.
WHEN THAT HAPPENS, THAT WILL PUT
THIS IN THE TOP FIVE SNOWSTORMS
IN THE HISTORY OF NEW YORK CITY.
>> Reporter: AT LEAST 11 PEOPLE
HAVE DIED IN SNOW-RELATED CAR
ACCIDENTS.
VIRGINIA STATE POLICE RESPONDED
TO MORE THAN A THOUSAND TRAFFIC
ACCIDENTS.
INTERSTATE 75 SOUTH OF
LEXINGTON, KENTUCKY, REOPENED
AFTER 3,000 PEOPLE WERE STUCK ON
IT OVERNIGHT.
THE NATIONAL GUARD HAS BEEN
RESCUING STRANDED MOTORISTS ON
THE PENNSYLVANIA TURNPIKE,
WHERE 500 CARS WERE BACKED UP
FOR MILES.
>> Stewart: CANADIAN PRIME
MINISTER JUSTIN TRUDEAU SAYS
YESTERDAY'S FATAL SCHOOL
SHOOTING IN THE PROVINCE OF
SASKATCHEWAN IS "EVERY PARENT'S
WORST NIGHTMARE."
THE SHOOTING TOOK PLACE AT THE
HIGH SCHOOL IN LA LOCHE, A
REMOTE TOWN OF 3,000 RESIDENTS.
THE DAUGHTER OF THE TOWN'S
MAYOR, A 23-YEAR-OLD TEACHER,
WAS ONE OF TWO PEOPLE KILLED AT
THE SCHOOL BY THE GUNMAN.
HE WAS ARRESTED OUTSIDE THE
SCHOOL.
THE TEENAGED SUSPECT ALLEGEDLY
SHOT AND KILLED HIS TWO BROTHERS
AT HOME BEFORE GOING TO THE
SCHOOL.
VICE PRESIDENT JOE BIDEN SAYS
THE UNITED STATES AND TURKEY ARE
COMMITTED TO DEFEAT MILITANTS
FROM THE ISLAMIC STATE IN IRAQ
AND SYRIA, OR ISIS, IN SYRIA.
THE VICE PRESIDENT IS IN
NEIGHBORING TURKEY THIS WEEKEND
FOR MEETINGS WITH TURKEY'S PRIME
MINISTER AND PRESIDENT.
BIDEN SAID THE ALLIES ARE
PREPARED TO INCREASE MILITARY
SUPPLIES TO FORCES IN SYRIA
ALIGNED AGAINST ISIS.
RUSSIA IS ALSO INCREASING ITS
MILITARY PRESENCE IN SYRIA,
MAINLY IN SUPPORT OF PRESIDENT
BASHAR AL-ASSAD.
UNITED NATIONS-BROKERED PEACE
TALKS BETWEEN ASSAD AND HIS
OPPONENTS RESUME NEXT WEEK IN
GENEVA.
TODAY, 45 OPPOSITION GROUPS
ISSUED A STATEMENT SAYING THEY
SUPPORT THE POLITICAL PROCESS.
"NEW YORK TIMES" REPORTER ANNE
BARNARD IS COVERING THE SYRIAN
CONFLICT.
SHE JOINS ME NOW BY SKYPE FROM
BEIRUT.
AND, ANNE, WHY ARE THE UNITED
STATES AND RUSSIA SIGNALING
THROUGH THEIR BEHAVIOR THAT
THEY'RE NOT NECESSARILY
CONFIDENT, LET'S SAY, IN A
POLITICAL END TO THIS?
>> Reporter: WELL, THERE ISN'T
MUCH REASON TO BE OPTIMISTIC
RIGHT NOW.
I MEAN, NOTHING FUNDAMENTAL HAS
CHANGED IN THE OPPOSITION-- IN
THE DIAMETRIC-- DIAMETRICALLY-
OPPOSED POSITIONS OF THE SYRIAN
GOVERNMENT AND ITS SYRIAN
INSURGENT OPPONENTS SINCE
GENEVA II, TWO YEARS AGO.
THERE'S STILL A DISAGREEMENT
ABOUT WHETHER PRESIDENT ASSAD
NEEDS TO LEAVE BEFORE A
POLITICAL TRANSITION BEGINS.
THERE'S DEFINITELY BEEN SOME
CHANGES ON THE GROUND, BUT
THERE'S STILL, YOU KNOW, NO SIGN
THAT ALL THE WARRING PARTIES
BELIEVE THAT THEY CAN GAIN MORE
THROUGH A PEACE SETTLEMENT THAN
THEY CAN BY CONTINUING TO FIGHT.
SO I THINK THERE'S REASON TO
BELIEVE THAT THE FIGHT WILL
CONTINUE.
AT THE SAME TIME, YOU HAVE AN
ENTIRE PIECE OF THIS MULTI-SIDED
WAR THAT'S NOT REALLY AFFECTED
BY THESE PEACE TALKS BECAUSE
IT'S WITH THE ISLAMIC STATE,
WHICH IS NOT INVOLVED OR INVITED
TO THE TALKS.
>> Stewart: NOW YOU WROTE IN
ONE OF YOUR PIECES AND FROM YOUR
REPORTING THAT THE UNITED
STATES AND RUSSIA HAS A
"FUNDAMENTAL DISAGREEMENT OF
HOW TO MOVE FORWARD."
WHAT'S AT THE HEART OF THE
DISAGREEMENT?
>> Reporter: YOU CAN'T GET
MUCH MORE FUNDAMENTAL THAN THIS
DISAGREEMENT OVER TO HOW TO
DEFEAT ISIS.
IN ORDER, THE UNITED STATES HAS
LONG SAID THE RISE OF ISIS IS
PREDOMINANTLY BECAUSE OF BASHAR
AL-ASSAD'S CRACKDOWN ON FIRST
PEACEFUL THEN ARMED OPPONENTS,
AND THAT THAT OPENED THE SPACE
FOR THIS RADICALLY EXTREMIST
GROUP TO GAIN A FOOTHOLD,
WHEREAS RUSSIA HAS LONG SAID
THAT THEY BELIEVE PRETTY MUCH
ALL OF THE FORCES FIGHTING
PRESIDENT ASSAD BY FORCE ARE
TERRORISTS, AS HE SAYS, AND THEY
DON'T MAKE MUCH DISTINCTION
BETWEEN THE ISLAMIC STATE AND
THE OTHER SPECTRUM OF INSURGENT
GROUPS THAT RANGE FROM
NATIONALIST REBELS TO AL-NUSRA,
AL QAEDA'S BRANCH IN SYRIA.
THE UNITED STATES USED A
MEANINGFUL SPECTRUM, WHEREAS
RUSSIA BASICALLY SEES THEM
ALL AS TERRORISTS AND IS
ATTACKING THE OTHER INSURGENTS,
IN FACT, MUCH MORE THAN IT'S
ATTACKING ISIS IN ITS AIR
STRIKES.
>> Stewart: WITH A COMMON
ENEMY LIKE ISIS, WHY ISN'T THAT
ENOUGH TO BRING ON SOME SORT OF
COLLABORATION?
>> Reporter: WELL, THIS IS A
GREAT QUESTION.
I MEAN, YOU KNOW, ALL OF THE
PARTIES GOING FROM IRAN TO
RUSSIA TO THE SYRIAN GOVERNMENT
TO EVEN THE AL QAEDA-LINKED
INSURGENTS TO OTHER INSURGENTS,
TO THE UNITED STATES, THEY ALL
PROFESS TO BE AGAINST ISIS.
BUT THE ISSUE IS THAT THE
ENMITIES BETWEEN AND AMONG THOSE
GROUPS SUPPOSEDLY ARRAYED
AGAINST ISIS ARE SO STRONG THAT
THEY ARE NOT ABLE TO UNITE
AGAINST IT.
>> Stewart: ANNE BARNARD
FROM THE "NEW YORK TIMES," THANK
YOU SO MUCH FOR SHARING YOUR
REPORTING.
>> Reporter: THANK YOU.
>> Stewart: SINCE THE START OF
THE NEW YEAR, POLICE IN THE
UNITED STATES HAVE SHOT AND
KILLED 50 PEOPLE, ACCORDING TO A
TALLY BY THE "WASHINGTON POST."
WHILE THE "POST" IS KEEPING
TRACK, THERE IS AN ABSENCE OF
GOVERNMENT STATISTICS MADE
PUBLIC ON POLICE-INVOLVED
DEATHS.
THE FREQUENCY OF THESE DEATHS
HAS PROMPTED THE F.B.I. TO BEGIN
TRACKING ALL POLICE ENCOUNTERS
THAT TURN VIOLENT.
THAT IS WELL BEYOND THE DATA
THAT ONLY 3% OF THE NATION'S
POLICE AGENCIES PROVIDE
TO THE F.B.I.
ALTHOUGH THE MAJORITY OF PEOPLE
KILLED BY POLICE ARE ARMED AND
ALLEGEDLY ENDANGERING OFFICERS,
POLICE USE OF DEADLY FORCE HAS
BECOME INCREASINGLY
CONTROVERSIAL AS MANY
CONFRONTATIONS HAVE BEEN
CAPTURED ON VIDEO DURING THE
PAST TWO YEARS.
AS A RESULT, SOME POLICE
DEPARTMENTS ARE RETRAINING
OFFICERS WITH THE GOAL OF
DECREASING THE LIKELIHOOD OF
THESE FATAL ENCOUNTERS.
IN TONIGHT'S SIGNATURE SEGMENT,
SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT CHRIS BURY
TAKES A CLOSER LOOK.
>> SEE THAT MAN?
SEE THAT MAN?
HE'S THREATENING PEOPLE WITH A
KNIFE!
>> Reporter: IN PHILADELPHIA,
THIS NEW POLICE RECRUIT IS
GETTING A TASTE OF CONFRONTING A
SUSPECT THAT HE MAY HAVE TO
SHOOT.
THIS TRAINING, IN FULL
PROTECTIVE GEAR, IS KNOWN AS A
REALITY-BASED SCENARIO.
>> SIR, DROP THE KNIFE!
>> Reporter: THIS IS A LESSON IN
DEFUSING HIGH-TENSION
ENCOUNTERS BEFORE THEY TURN
DEADLY.
IN PHILADELPHIA, EVERY OFFICER
GETS 40 HOURS OF THIS REALITY
TRAINING TO LEARN TACTICS OTHER
THAN LETHAL FORCE, EVEN WHEN
SUSPECTS ARE ARMED AND
DANGEROUS.
>> IS HE THREATENING ANYBODY
RIGHT NOW?
>> NO.
>> IS HE KILLING ANYBODY RIGHT
NOW?
>> NO.
>> SO, DO WE HAVE TO TURN AROUND
AND JUMP RIGHT IN THERE AND TAKE
CARE OF IT OURSELVES?
>> NO.
>> Reporter: SERGEANT KENNETH
GILL, A POLICE ACADEMY
INSTRUCTOR, SAYS THE TRAINING IS
DESIGNED TO TEACH POLICE
OFFICERS HOW TO DE-ESCALATE
EMOTIONALLY CHARGED
CONFRONTATIONS.
>> SLOW DOWN THE MOMENTUM.
DON'T ALWAYS JUST RUSH INTO
SOMETHING.
YOU KNOW, YOU WANT TO BE ABLE TO
LOOK AT YOUR SURROUNDINGS.
WHAT ELSE CAN I DO, EXCEPT FOR
JUMP IN?
>> Reporter: WITH SO MANY
QUESTIONABLE POLICE SHOOTINGS
CAUGHT ON CAMERA DURING THE PAST
TWO YEARS, HOW POLICE ARE
TRAINED IS COMING UNDER GREATER
SCRUTINY, ALONG WITH CALLS FOR
REFORM.
STUDIES BY THE "WASHINGTON POST"
AND THE "GUARDIAN" FOUND POLICE
IN THIS COUNTRY SHOT AND KILLED
ABOUT 1,000 PEOPLE LAST YEAR,
ALMOST THREE PEOPLE A DAY.
THE "POST" FOUND 987 CASES; AND
THE "GUARDIAN," 1,014.
THE COUNTRY'S 18,000 POLICE
DEPARTMENTS, ON AVERAGE, TRAIN
OFFICERS FOR ONLY A TOTAL OF 15
WEEKS BEFORE ROOKIES HIT THE
STREETS.
MARIA HABERFELD, A PROFESSOR OF
POLICE SCIENCE AT THE JOHN JAY
COLLEGE OF CRIMINAL JUSTICE IN
NEW YORK, BLAMES POOR POLICE
TRAINING, NOT ROGUE COPS, FOR
MANY QUESTIONABLE CASES OF
LETHAL FORCE.
>> THERE ARE POLICE OFFICERS WHO
DO NOT BELONG ON THE JOB, WHO
ARE TRIGGER HAPPY.
BUT THIS IS NOT THE OVERWHELMING
MAJORITY.
TO THE CONTRARY, THIS IS A
FRACTION OF A FRACTION.
BUT THE OVERWHELMING MAJORITY
ARE POORLY TRAINED.
>> Reporter: FOR POLICE OFFICERS
ACROSS THE COUNTRY, GUIDELINES
ABOUT DEADLY FORCE ARE BASED ON
SUPREME COURT RULINGS THAT
JUSTIFY IT WHEN OFFICERS FEEL
THAT THEY OR OTHERS ARE IN
IMMINENT DANGER.
BUT THERE ARE NO NATIONAL
STANDARDS.
AND IN THE WAKE OF SO MANY
NOTORIOUS POLICE SHOOTINGS, SOME
DEPARTMENTS INCLUDING THE ONE
HERE IN COLUMBUS ARE REINFORCING
THE IDEA THAT DEADLY FORCE
SHOULD BE A MATTER OF LAST
RESORT.
>> SO, HE HAS A KNIFE...
>> Reporter: AT THE POLICE
ACADEMY HERE, VETERANS AND
ROOKIES ALIKE ARE STUDYING
VIDEOS OF POLICE INVOLVED
SHOOTINGS.
>> WHAT ELSE COULD HAVE BEEN
DONE?
COULD THIS LIFE HAVE BEEN SAVED?
HOW WOULD YOU DO IT YOURSELF?
IS THERE A BETTER WAY?
>> Reporter: POLICE CHIEF KIM
JACOBS, A 36-YEAR VETERAN OF
THE COLUMBUS POLICE DEPARTMENT,
BECAME CHIEF IN 2012.
AFTER THE 2014 FERGUSON,
MISSOURI, POLICE SHOOTING OF
MICHAEL BROWN, WHO WAS UNARMED,
JACOBS ORDERED NEW LETHAL FORCE
TRAINING IN COLUMBUS.
COMMUNITY MEETINGS HAD CONVINCED
HER THAT A CHANGE WAS NEEDED.
>> WHY DO PEOPLE FEAR US?
AND I HEARD THAT IN OUR
COMMUNITY MEETINGS.
PEOPLE FEAR THE POLICE!
THAT'S ABSURD TO ME
BECAUSE WE'RE THE GOOD PEOPLE.
AND YET, PEOPLE ARE AFRAID OF
HOW WE'RE GOING TO REACT.
>> Reporter: AND THAT IS
UNDERSTANDABLE, CHIEF JACOBS
SAYS, WHEN PEOPLE SEE VIDEOS
LIKE THIS 2014 RECORDING OF A
POLICE DASHBOARD CAMERA IN SOUTH
CAROLINA.
THE INCIDENT BEGAN WHEN STATE
TROOPER SEAN GRUBERT PULLED OVER
DRIVER LEVAR JONES FOR NOT
WEARING A SEAT BELT.
GRUBERT ASKED JONES FOR HIS
DRIVER'S LICENSE.
>> CAN I SEE YOUR LICENSE,
PLEASE?
GET OUT OF THE CAR!
>> Reporter: WHEN JONES REACHED
INSIDE HIS CAR, GRUBERT OPENED
FIRE.
DID THAT SEEM LIKE A THREAT TO
YOU?
>> I HAVE NO REASON TO THINK
THAT THERE WAS A THREAT AT THAT
POINT IN TIME.
WHEN I THINK ABOUT WHEN I WOULD
JUSTIFY MYSELF PULLING THE
TRIGGER, I WANT TO BE CERTAIN
THAT I AM IN IMMINENT DANGER
AND THERE'S SOME WAY THAT THAT
COULD HAPPEN.
>> Reporter: JONES SURVIVED;
GRUBERT WAS FIRED AND CHARGED
WITH AGGRAVATED ASSAULT.
>> WHAT COULD THE COP DO
DIFFERENTLY?
>> Reporter: IN COLUMBUS, SUCH
VIDEOS ARE CASE STUDIES IN HOW
NOTTO HANDLE POTENTIALLY
COMBUSTIBLE MOMENTS.
CHIEF JACOBS SAYS A RUSH TO USE
OF LETHAL FORCE IS A COMMON
MISTAKE AND ONE THAT
CONTRIBUTED TO ONE OF OHIO'S
MOST INFAMOUS POLICE SHOOTINGS,
THE DEATH OF 12-YEAR-OLD TAMIR
RICE IN CLEVELAND IN 2014.
RICE HAD BEEN HOLDING A TOY GUN
IN A PARK WHEN POLICE,
RESPONDING TO A 911 CALL, DROVE
WITHIN A FEW FEET OF RICE AND
SECONDS LATER OPENED FIRE.
WHAT ALTERNATIVE DID THOSE
OFFICERS HAVE?
WHAT COULD THEY HAVE DONE
BETTER?
>> NOT GOTTEN THAT CLOSE.
THEY COULD EITHER GET OUT ON
FOOT AND APPROACHED HIM AND
GIVEN HIM ORDERS, "LET ME SEE
YOUR HANDS," ALL THAT KIND OF
THING.
THEY COULD HAVE TRIED TO FIND
OUT EITHER VIA INTERCOM OR
SOMETHING ELSE WHAT THIS
PERSON'S INTENTIONS WERE.
>> Reporter: IN PHILADELPHIA, A
SPIKE IN POLICE SHOOTINGS THREE
YEARS AGO LED THEN-POLICE
COMMISSIONER CHARLES RAMSEY,
WHO RETIRED EARLIER THIS MONTH,
TO ASK THE U.S. JUSTICE
DEPARTMENT FOR HELP.
>> I WANTED TO TAKE A LOOK AT
OUR TRAINING.
I WANTED TO LOOK AT OUR POLICY
TO MAKE SURE WE'RE DOING
EVERYTHING WE CAN TO MINIMIZE
THE NUMBER OF TIMES THAT AN
OFFICER WOULD ACTUALLY HAVE TO
RESORT TO THE USE OF DEADLY
FORCE.
>> TURN AROUND SLOWLY!
KEEP BOTH HANDS UP!
>> Reporter: THE JUSTICE
DEPARTMENT OFFERED MORE THAN 90
RECOMMENDATIONS, INCLUDING
INCREASED REALITY-BASED
TRAINING, WHICH EMPHASIZES
STRATEGIES THAT GIVE POLICE MORE
TIME AND DISTANCE FROM SUSPECTS
IN HIGH-RISK ENCOUNTERS.
>> YOU HAVE TO CALL FOR BACKUP
RIGHT AWAY.
>> Reporter: SUCH TACTICS
INCLUDE CALLING FOR BACKUP,
FINDING COVER OR MOVING AWAY
FROM A DANGEROUS SUSPECT,
ENGAGING THE SUSPECT IN
CONVERSATION.
>> SLOW THE MOMENTUM.
SLOW IT DOWN.
>> Reporter: SINCE ADOPTING THE
RECOMMENDATIONS, THE
PHILADELPHIA POLICE DEPARTMENT'S
FATAL SHOOTINGS ARE DOWN.
IN 2013, POLICE SHOT AND KILLED
11 PEOPLE.
THAT FELL TO FOUR IN 2014 AND
ONLY TWO LAST YEAR.
>> WE HAVE TO TRAIN TO MAKE SURE
THAT OUR OFFICERS ONLY USE THE
FORCE NECESSARY UNDER THE MOST
EXTREME CIRCUMSTANCES, THAT
BEING DEADLY FORCE.
PERIOD.
DOESN'T MATTER WHO THE OFFENDER
IS.
>> Reporter: BUT TRAINING IN
DEADLY FORCE TACTICS IS STRICTLY
UP TO INDIVIDUAL POLICE
DEPARTMENTS.
MARIA HABERFELD ARGUES THAT
NEEDS TO CHANGE.
>> TO ME, IT'S MANDATORY TO
IDENTIFY MINIMAL STANDARDS FOR
EACH AND EVERY POLICE DEPARTMENT
IN THE COUNTRY WITH REGARDS TO
USE OF FORCE.
AND NOT JUST THE LENGTH OF
TRAINING, BUT ALSO THE CONTENT.
BECAUSE IT'S ONE THING TO TRAIN
POLICE OFFICERS HOW TO USE A
GUN, BUT IT'S ANOTHER TO TRAIN
POLICE OFFICERS WHAT KIND OF
FACTORS GO INTO USING DEADLY
FORCE.
>> Reporter: HABERFELD AND OTHER
CRIMINOLOGISTS SAY POLICE
DEPARTMENTS ALSO NEED TO
INCORPORATE MORE TRAINING ON
RACE.
IN COLUMBUS, BLACK PEOPLE MAKE
UP 28% OF THE CITY'S POPULATION
BUT ONLY 12% OF THE POLICE
FORCE.
SERGEANT JAMES FUQUA SAYS HAVING
MORE OFFICERS WHO REFLECT THE
NEIGHBORHOODS THEY PATROL COULD
HELP REDUCE MISPERCEPTIONS AND
VIOLENT EXCHANGES.
>> I'M NOT CALLING ANYBODY A
RACIST OR IT'S RACIALLY
MOTIVATED.
I JUST THINK SOMETIMES THERE'S A
MISUNDERSTANDING WITH CULTURAL
DIFFERENCES.
>> Reporter: DID YOU GET HASSLED
BECAUSE YOU WERE A YOUNG BLACK
MAN?
>> ABSOLUTELY, ABSOLUTELY, JUST
BECAUSE OF THE COLOR OF MY SKIN
AND THE NEIGHBORHOOD IN WHICH I
LIVED.
MANY TIMES, I WAS, FOR LACK OF
BETTER WORDS, HARASSED.
WHEN I GOT OLDER, I REALIZED
THAT THEY WEREN'T BAD PEOPLE
AND THEY WERE JUST DOING THEIR
JOB.
AND THEN, ONCE I BECAME AN
OFFICER, I REALIZED THAT, YOU
KNOW, THEY WERE TRYING TO DO
THEIR JOB.
BUT AT THE END OF THE DAY, THEY
KIND OF DID A POOR JOB WITH THE
COMMUNITY POLICING ASPECT OF IT.
>> Reporter: FORMER FEDERAL
PROSECUTOR SHARON DAVIES
BELIEVES POLICE TRAINING SHOULD
ALSO FOCUS ON UNINTENDED OR
IMPLICIT RACIAL BIAS.
DAVIES HEADS THE KIRWAN
INSTITUTE ON RACE AT OHIO STATE
UNIVERSITY AND IS A CONSULTANT
TO THE COLUMBUS POLICE.
>> IF THOSE ASSOCIATIONS ARE
NEGATIVE, SUCH AS PRESUMPTIONS
OF VIOLENCE OR THREAT OR
CRIMINALITY, THAT CAN MAKE A
POLICE OFFICER SEE A THREAT
WHERE THERE IS NO THREAT.
>> Reporter: WHAT DO YOU SEE AS
POTENTIAL SOLUTIONS?
I MEAN, DO WE NEED CHANGES IN
STATE LAW?
OR DO WE NEED MUCH BETTER POLICE
TRAINING?
>> THERE'S ABSOLUTELY NO
QUESTION THAT ALL POLICE FORCES
SHOULD BE TRAINED ABOUT THE
REALITY OF UNCONSCIOUS RACIAL
BIASES THAT AFFECT ALL OF US.
THAT'S A REALITY THAT ALL OF US
NEED TO TAKE VERY SERIOUSLY, AND
POLICE OFFICERS ESPECIALLY.
>> Reporter: NOT EVEN THE MOST
ADVANCED TRAINING CAN ELIMINATE
LETHAL FORCE, AND POLICE ARE
LEGALLY JUSTIFIED TO USE IT IN
ORDER TO SAVE LIVES, INCLUDING
THEIR OWN.
IN FACT, THE "WASHINGTON POST"
STUDY FOUND THAT "IN THREE-
QUARTERS OF THE FATAL SHOOTINGS,
POLICE WERE UNDER ATTACK OR
DEFENDING SOMEONE WHO WAS."
IN PHILADELPHIA AND COLUMBUS,
POLICE ARE CONVINCED BETTER
TRAINING CAN GIVE OFFICERS
BETTER OPTIONS THAN SHOOTING TO
KILL.
>> YOU DON'T GROW UP BEING
TAUGHT HOW TO DEAL WITH THE
POLICE.
THE POLICE ARE TAUGHT HOW TO
DEAL WITH OUR CITIZENS.
AND, SO, IT'S OUR
RESPONSIBILITY.
>> Stewart: SEE HOW THE MEMPHIS
POLICE DEPARTMENT IS TRAINING
OFFICERS TO RESPOND TO THOSE
EXPERIENCING A MENTAL HEALTH
CRISIS.
WATCH OUR REPORT AT
www.pbs.org/newshour.
THE VISA WAIVER PROGRAM ALLOWS
VISITORS TO THE UNITED STATES
FROM 38 COUNTRIES, MOSTLY IN
EUROPE, TO ENTER AND STAY IN THE
U.S. FOR 90 DAYS WITHOUT A VISA
OR INTERVIEW OVERSEAS.
ABOUT 20 MILLION TRAVELERS COME
TO THE U.S. THIS WAY EVERY YEAR.
BUT THE GROWTH OF RADICALIZED
FOREIGN FIGHTERS, WHO HAVE
JOINED FORCES WITH ISLAMIC
MILITANTS IN IRAQ AND SYRIA AND
THEN HAVE RETURNED TO EUROPE,
HAS LED U.S. OFFICIALS TO
TIGHTEN THE PROGRAM.
THIS WEEK, THE OBAMA
ADMINISTRATION BEGAN ENFORCING A
LAW PASSED BY CONGRESS LAST
MONTH THAT PREVENTS ANYONE FROM
A VISA WAIVER COUNTRY WHO HAS
DUAL CITIZENSHIP WITH IRAN,
IRAQ, SYRIA OR SUDAN FROM
VISITING THE U.S. VISA-FREE.
FOR MORE ON THESE NEW SECURITY
MEASURES, I AM JOINED BY
"WASHINGTON POST" REPORTER
KAROUN DEMIRJIAN.
KAROUN, I HAVE A QUESTION FOR
YOU-- WHAT WAS THE INITIAL
CATALYST FOR THIS CHANGE?
AND WHAT FLAW WAS EXPOSED THAT
NEEDED TO BE FIXED?
>> A LOT OF PEOPLE IN CONGRESS
HAD BEEN LOOKING AT THE VISA
WAIVER PROGRAM FOR A WHILE BUT
THE THING THAT BROUGHT IT ALL
TOGETHER WAS THE TERROR ATTACKS
IN PARIS AND SAN BERNARDINO, AND
YOU HAD A LOT OF MEMBERS SAYING
WE NEED TO LOOK AT THIS VERY
CLOSELY.
THE FIRST MEASURE THAT CONGRESS
STARTED TO LOOK AT WAS SYRIAN/
IRAQI REFUGEE RESETTLEMENTS, AND
THEY SAID THE VISA WAIVER
PROGRAM WAS A BIGGER CONCERN
BECAUSE SO MANY PEOPLE USE IT TO
COME TO THE UNITED STATES AND A
LARGE PERCENTAGE OF THE FOREIGN
FIGHTERS WHO JOINED A LOT OF
THESE EXTREMIST GROUPS DO HAVE
EUROPEAN PASSPORTS.
WHAT THEY SETTLED ON IN THIS
BILL WAS, THIS MEASURE, IF YOU
TRAVELED TO IRAQ, SUDAN, SYRIA
OR IRAN SINCE THE BEGINNING OF
MARCH IN 2011-- THAT'S THE DATE
THE SYRIAN CIVIL WAR STARTED--
OR IF YOU'RE A DUAL NATIONAL,
WHICH MEANS YOU HOLD EUROPEAN
PASSPORT-- VISA WAIVER
COUNTRY-ELIGIBLE PASSPORT BUT
ALSO A PASSPORT FROM THAT
COUNTRY, CITIZENSHIP THERE, YOU
CAN'T COME TO THE U.S. UNDER THE
REDUCED EXPEDITED PROCEDURES.
YOU HAVE TO GO THROUGH THE
REGULAR SCREENING THAT INVOLVES
AN IN-PERSON INTERVIEW AT AN
EMBASSY OR CONSULATE.
>> Stewart: HOW DOES THIS
AFFECT PEOPLE LIKE JOURNALISTS
OR N.G.O.s OR CHARITY WORKERS
WHO ARE GOING TO COUNTRIES TO
TRY TO HELP PEOPLE?
>> THERE WAS ALWAYS A PROVISION
IN THE BILL, IN THE LAW, THAT
SAID THE GOVERNMENT CAN CHOOSE
TO WAIVE THE RESTRICTIONS WHEN
IT'S IN THE INTERESTS OF LAW
ENFORCEMENT OR NATIONAL SECURITY
OF THE UNITED STATES.
AND SO, THE RULE THAT THE
ADMINISTRATION SAID THEY WERE
GOING TO IMPLEMENT THIS WEEK,
THEY ACTUALLY CITED MANY OF
THOSE CATEGORIES-- THAT IF YOU
ARE A JOURNALIST, IF ARE YOU
WORKING FOR AN INTERNATIONAL
N.G.O. OR LEGITIMATE GOVERNMENT,
OR IF YOU HAD A LEGITIMATE
BUSINESS INTEREST IN IRAQ OR IN
IRAN SINCE THE NUCLEAR PACT WAS
SIGNED, YOU CAN APPLY FOR A
WAIVER, AND THOSE WAIVERS WILL
BE AVAILABLE.
>> Stewart: CAN THERE BE AN
ARGUMENT MADE THAT THIS IS AN
OVERREACTION OR
OVER-CORRECTION?
>> PEOPLE HAVE MADE THAT
ARGUMENT.
THE CHANGES WERE VERY POPULAR.
THEY GOT A LOT OF BIPARTISAN
SUPPORT WHEN THEY WERE THERE FOR
A STRAIGHT UP-OR-DOWN VOTE IN
THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES AND
THEN, OF COURSE, IT PASSED AS
PART OF THE BIGGER BUDGET BILL
AS MUCH AS THERE ARE PEOPLE WHO
WANT TO PULL THIS BACK AND SAY
LET'S LOOK AT THE PROGRAM AGAIN,
MAYBE DO EVEN MORE MEASURES ON
THE-- IN THE OTHER CAPACITIES
WHERE IT HAS TO DO WHO SECURITY,
SHARING OF INFORMATION AND
SCREENING THAT ISN'T IN A WAY
THAT'S GOING TO BE BLOCKING
PEOPLE OUT BY CATEGORY, THERE'S
CERTAINLY DISCUSSION ABOUT
WANTING TO DO THAT, BUT THERE'S
NOTHING THAT'S BEEN SCHEDULED TO
ACTUALLY GO AHEAD AND REVISIT
WHAT THEY JUST PASSED.
>> Stewart: KAROUM DEMIRIJIAN
FROM THE "WASHINGTON POST,"
THANKS SO MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
THIS IS PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND,
SATURDAY.
>> Stewart: THE CENTERS FOR
DISEASE CONTROL AND PREVENTION
IS EXPANDING ITS TRAVEL WARNING
OVER THE MOSQUITO-BORN VIRUS
ZIKA.
THE C.D.C. ADDED EIGHT COUNTRIES
TO THE LIST OF PLACES PREGNANT
WOMEN SHOULD NOT TRAVEL TO AVOID
RISK OF INFECTION, INCLUDING
BARBADOS, BOLIVIA AND ECUADOR.
THAT BRINGS THE LIST TO 22
MOSTLY LATIN AMERICAN AND
CARIBBEAN DESTINATIONS TO AVOID.
THE LARGEST IS BRAZIL, WHICH HAD
A ZIKA OUTBREAK LAST SPRING.
ZIKA HAS BEEN LINKED TO A BIRTH
DEFECT THAT CAUSES BABIES TO BE
BORN WITH BRAIN DAMAGE AND
UNUSUALLY SMALL HEADS.
IN NEW YORK, THREE PEOPLE HAVE
TESTED POSITIVE FOR THE VIRUS
AND ARE BEING TREATED.
ALL THREE HAD TRAVELED TO
COUNTRIES WITH ZIKA INFECTIONS.
THE NATIONAL HIGHWAY TRAFFIC
SAFETY ADMINISTRATION IS
RECALLING FIVE MILLION MORE
VEHICLES DUE TO FAULTY AIRBAGS
MADE BY THE JAPANESE COMPANY
TAKATA.
THE ORDER FOLLOWS THE DEATH OF A
DRIVER WHO CRASHED HIS FORD
RANGER PICK-UP LAST MONTH IN
SOUTH CAROLINA.
HE DIED WHEN A TAKATA AIRBAG
EXPLODED AND SENT METAL AND
PLASTIC SHRAPNEL FLYING.
THIS IS THE TENTH DEATH
WORLDWIDE ATTRIBUTED TO TAKATA
AIRBAGS.
THE RECALL BRINGS THE NUMBER OF
AFFECTED CARS AND TRUCKS IN THE
U.S. TO 24 MILLION.
THE FIRST AMERICAN DOWNHILL
SKIER TO WIN AN OLYMPIC GOLD
MEDAL HAS DIED.
BILL JOHNSON WON GOLD AT THE
1984 WINTER OLYMPICS IN
SARAJEVO.
AFTER THAT, THE BRASH
CALIFORNIAN CONTINUED TO COMPETE
BUT NEVER WON ANOTHER OLYMPIC
MEDAL.
A SKIING ACCIDENT IN 2001 LEFT
JOHNSON IN A COMA FOR THREE
WEEKS AND WITH PERMANENT BRAIN
DAMAGE.
HE RELEARNED HOW TO WALK, TALK,
EAT AND SKI, BUT STROKES IN
2010 TOOK HIM OFF THE SLOPES FOR
GOOD.
JOHNSON DIED AT AN ASSISTED
LIVING FACILITY IN OREGON ON
THURSDAY.
HE WAS 55 YEARS OLD.
KEEP UP TO DATE ON THE LATEST
DEVELOPMENTS OF WINTER STORM
JONAS BY VISITING OUR WEBSITE AT
www.pbs.org/newshour.
>> Stewart: FINALLY, TEN DAYS
BEFORE THE FIRST PRESIDENTIAL
CAMPAIGN VOTES ARE CAST IN IOWA,
ANOTHER CANDIDATE IS EYEING THE
RACE.
THE "NEW YORK TIMES" REPORTS
FORMER NEW YORK CITY MAYOR MIKE
BLOOMBERG IS DRAWING UP PLANS TO
RUN AS AN INDEPENDENT.
BLOOMBERG, WHO IS WORTH AN
ESTIMATED $36 BILLION, IS SAID
TO BE WILLING TO SPEND $1
BILLION ON A GENERAL ELECTION
CAMPAIGN.
THE 73-YEAR-OLD BLOOMBERG
FLIRTED WITH PRESIDENTIAL
CAMPAIGNS IN 2008 AND 2012.
THE "TIMES" SAYS HE'S GIVING
HIMSELF UNTIL MARCH TO DECIDE.
THAT'S ALL FOR THIS EDITION OF
PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
I'M ALISON STEWART.
THANKS FOR WATCHING.
GOOD NIGHT.